---
layout: post
title: "SHA-256"
date: 2024-03-31 08:14:36 +0530
categories: cryptography
featured: true
image: assets/images/sha-hash-fn.png
permalink: /sha-256
---  

**SHA-256** stands for Secure Hash Algorithm 256-bit and it’s used for generating a cryptographic hash.It was designed by the National Security Agency (NSA) in the United States. SHA-256 is a one-way mathematical function that takes an input (or message) and produces a fixed-size string of characters, typically 256 bits long. SHA-256 owes its popularity because of its ability to create a non reversible hash i.e. if you have its result, you should never be able to reverse it back to the input. It's considered cryptographically secure, meaning it's computationally infeasible to reverse the process and retrieve the original input from its hash value. 

Now that we know what is SHA-256. Let's dive into the **strengths** of SHA-256.
- **Security:** SHA-256 is highly secure due to its cryptographic properties. It's resistant to various types of attacks, including preimage, second preimage, and collision attacks. This makes it suitable for applications where data integrity and authenticity are critical.

- **Data Integrity:** SHA-256 generates a fixed-size hash value for a given input. It allows users to verify that the data has not been tampered with or corrupted during transmission or storage.

- **Performance:** SHA-256 can generate hash values quickly, making it suitable for real-time applications and systems with high throughput requirements.

SHA-256 has its own set of **weaknesses** like anyother cryptographic algorithm. Here are a couple that are prominent.
- **Length Extension Attacks:** While SHA-256 itself is resistant to many types of attacks, it is vulnerable to length extension attacks. These attacks exploit the deterministic nature of the algorithm, allowing an attacker to append additional data to a known hash value without knowing the original input.

- **Cryptographic Weaknesses:** Although SHA-256 is considered secure with the current state of technology, future advances in cryptanalysis or computing power aka Post Quantum could potentially weaken its security. As cryptographic standards evolve, it's essential to monitor and update algorithms accordingly to address any vulnerabilities that may arise.

- **Limited Collision Resistance:** While SHA-256 offers strong collision resistance, it's not immune to collisions entirely. The sheer size of the output space (2^256 possible hash values) makes collisions extremely unlikely but not impossible. As computing power increases, the probability of finding collisions may diminish, albeit still theoretically feasible.

### Applications of SHA-256
SHA-256 cryptographic properties make it an essential tool in ensuring data security, integrity, and authenticity across various domains.
- **Data Integrity:** SHA256 hashing is used to check the integrity of the data transferred over a network or stored in a data store
- **Digital Signatures:** SHA256 is used to generate the certificate fingerprints for TLS/SSL certificates
- **Password Hashing:** SHA256 is generally used along ith salting to store passwords in a database
- **Blockchain and Cryptocurrencies:** Bitcoin and many other crypto currencies use SHA256 to compute the hash of a target that requires significant computational effort, thus securing the blockchain against tampering.
- **Secure Messaging Protocols:** SHA-256 is used in secure messaging protocols like PGP and S/MIME  to create digital signatures and ensure the integrity of messages exchanged between parties.

